Everybody. This is Tim Ferris.
And I'm answering a question today that I get very often,
which is what are you learning? What are you studying? And it is 2020.
And I am an amateur learning hand percussion
specifically with this instrument. And it looks like a UFO,
as you can see, and it is known by many different names.
Some people call it a hang, some people call it a hang drum.
There are religious Wars about this and other people call it a han.
D pan. There are many different brands, many different makers.
This particular instrument was made by Dave Berry,
B E R Y super-sweet guy in
California. And this is tuned to the Hijaz scale. And this instrument,
you can think of it as a simplified, of course,
as a steel drum that you might see in the Caribbean,
which has been turned into a casing with two sides.
And this particular instrument is tuned with hammering and metal work.
So you really don't want your instrument to get knocked out of tune unless you
happen to be a really good metal worker.
And I'm going to demonstrate some basic features of the instrument.
I am not a good hand pan player or hand percussionist,
but I've been very fortunate to get a handful of very,
very nice instruments. This is Dave berries.
This is another hand pan that I'll demo down here,
which is made by Jaan Boren. Hopefully I'm getting that name, right?
J a N B O R R E N and the Netherlands.
And I've had some fantastic instruction from someone I found
on YouTube because he's amazing. David Cook cut a mountain. I'm sure.
David I'm screwing up your name yet again,
but David K U C K E R H E R M
a N N. And you can find him@handpandojo.com,
where he offers all sorts of online courses and programs for learning this
instrument. And if you want to see a highlight of him,
just search his name and prelude on YouTube. It's amazing.
He has 50,000 plus followers on YouTube for playing hand
percussion, which is a feat in and of itself. All right.
I love said let's get into this. So I'll just demo some basics once again,
to emphasize I'm not a good player, but I love playing this instrument.
And of course I say without further ado,
and then I keep on going with my preamble, but I've tried many,
many musical instruments. When I was a kid. I tried piano and I quit.
I tried trumpet and I quit because in the beginning,
it's very hard to sound good. I did gravitate towards five-piece drum kit,
but only had a few lessons until I graduated from college.
At which point I was in a tiny apartment and could couldn't make it work. So.
You hear there is a lot of reverberation and the sound
between these two instruments will be very, very different. Okay?
So you've got a scale. This is tuned to Hejaz, which has a middle Eastern sound.
[Inaudible] producing sound out of this.
Just to David. If I get anything wrong, it's my fault. It's not your fault.
David is a machine he's amazing.
And one of the best teachers of any skill I've ever met,
these are tone fields. And I'm making contact.
With.
Index finger primarily around this portion of the tone fields,
these tone fields.
And I'm playing with my thumbs as I get closer to my body because otherwise I
end up going chicken wing and it's ergonomically very uncomfortable, right?
[Inaudible].
It's on slightly bent,
not like that because that is how you make your hands ache,
which I did in the meeting.
And this is the dang or the.
Doing there's many different words.
For it. It's like that with this.
Thicker part of my thumb or index finger on.
There and making contact with the Palm. Okay.
So let me just tool around on this for a second.
And it'll give you an idea of what this thing is capable of.
And I'll try to produce a few different types of sounds.
So
these very light notes.
Ghost notes, drew really cool. David introduced me to those and, uh.
And then you can get some cool effects. You can use.
Hands like this, which you wouldn't want to hit on the Tony fields, but if.
You want it to do
do that kind of thing, there's a tuck. Just that.
So if we were to use, and these are my notes from some of what I did with David,
if we're using a rhythm known as the,
I believe it's Holly, G K H a L I G I,
I unfortunately do not speak Arabic, but there are a lot of amazing,
amazing rhythms and techniques that come out of Middle-Eastern music.
It would look something like the following and there are different ways to play
it. So.
So notice I'm doing one to,
so the right hand is having two points of contact.
Now you can produce the same sound using.
Alternating hands and just the left-hand. So if you look at this.
No, I just switched the left hand.
So those are three different hands.
The techniques for producing the same rhythm on the same surface,
and which you use would depend on what you're using and how you're using the
rest of this surface. It's super exciting. It's so fun. Uh, and,
uh, you can use multiple fingers on multiple tone fields.
So if I want it to do something, let's just say like,
and I'll move over to this other hand pan in a minute.
But
I'm using these two fingers together,
right? David.
Does all this thousand times better. So go watch his videos,
but this will show you how much a novice who really doesn't know what he's doing
and can have fun with this instrument and playing just 10,
15 minutes in the morning or at night is just pure bliss and meditation.
Okay. All right. So this is.
That surface. Dave does really, something really fun with his instrument,
this particular instrument,
where you can see the surfaces very different on this side.
And if you were say doing a performance on a hand pan after 60
minutes of one scale, you might get tired of doing what you're doing.
People might get a little fatigued of listening to it. So then.
So you can.
Play with all sorts of stuff. I'm less practiced on this side, but.
Can.
Certainly throw some novelty in there. So that is,
that is hand pan one from Dave, uh, which I really enjoy.
Playing. And.
This is a very, very different hand pan from the Netherlands. And you can see.
It looks a bit like.
And pan that took at least one or two hits of acid is asymmetrical.
And the tune fields are Nolan.
Uh.
DentiCal oval. So it's distributed differently.
And another difference that you'll find,
and I'm not adept enough to take advantage of this is there are tone fields on
the bottom so that you could hypothetically be playing on this side
and still
Advantage of this under the rim,
which is really cool.
David's exceptional at doing this and the way I'm already orienting.
This is generally speaking.
And those of you who are paying attention may notice this has more tone fields,
more notes, and I'm orienting this so that
the deepest
Towards my navel effectively,
and that's going to split this right down the middle so that I have my left and
right hands working on 50% of this instrument, right? And so
A different look and feel, and you can find some of these interested,
some of these instruments are tuned with minor key,
so it can have a melancholic sort of point in sound to it.
And others are very upbeat and it's hard to go wrong.
When you have an instrument like this tuned in a particular way,
you can kind of whack on it almost any way you want,
and it's gonna sound pretty good. Uh, so one.
Three, four, five, six.
You can do, you can do scales. So you can do seven notes, eight notes,
nine notes, something like.
Oops
[inaudible].
And that could be a practice for you like seven, eight, nine, seven, eight,
nine, or seven, seven, eight, eight, nine, nine.
And then there is a technique. So we talked about.
Right.
Uh, and, uh,
you could use that for any number of rhythmic combinations.
So for example, you could do something like.
Slowing it down.
And then if you wanted to throw toxin there, you could do that as well.
So you can just.
I'll say go higher up
and that you can.
Really experiment. So if you want to do something a little bit.
Uh, involved, you could do.
You just riff and it's very, it's very playful.
You can also play it.
Sort of a, a, a drum on itself.
Wait.
What can be done? So those are some of the basics.
I'll show you one more type of hand contact and you can use all.
Sorts of, right.
David's quite good at using his knuckles.
Uh, but you can do a slap as well. So I'll set up
again, get the lowest note in front of me.
So you can do something like, uh, so the slap I'm going to do.
And you can do it as you are.
You're sort of pushing into the instruments, not a.
Quick release. You see that
you might do something like.
So there you have it folks. Uh,
this is one of my favorite instruments.
It is a really fun instrument to play.
It is unfortunately because of the worksmanship that has to go into these.
It is an expensive instrument purchase, but they're beautiful.
And it's allowed me an entry way into
music and becoming fascinated with music in a way that I haven't known before,
because it's difficult to take a five-piece drum kit and put it in your house
for a lot of people. It is difficult to travel with five-piece drum kit,
but when you have something like this or many other types
of frame drum, our other hand drums,
it opens up an entire universe of possibilities.
And another aspect of that, that is really beautiful.
This hand roaming has existed in every civilization, uh,
past I'm sure in the future and across the world. So it is a common language.
Anyway,
there you have a brief introduction to my love of this instrument,
my apologies for any mistakes that I may have made, uh, if I misspoke,
if I offended anyone's delicate sense abilities, my apologies, uh,
but, uh, thank you to Dave Barry, to David,
uh, [inaudible] cook Hudman, uh, who is just remarkable,
and the many people out there who are producing these instruments and producing
beautiful music. Thanks guys.